A confusing build failure first draft (#45)
tsalik/kostas-tsalikis.com: content/posts/a_confusing_build_failure.md

---
title: "A confusing build failure"
date: 2019-11-07T01:00:09+02:00
draft: true
tags: ["testing", "continuous integration"]
description: "How can a unit test pass on Android Studio and fail on a Continuous Integration daemon?"
---

{{< figure src="/images/posts/broken_builds/judge-dredd-under-arrest.jpg" title="" >}}

##### TL;DR
* Do not overuse mock test doubles.
* Check the quality of tests in code reviews as well.
* Validate that the build between Android Studio and CI servers is invoked through the same commands.

> * Investigate thoroughly build failures and try to have them fix as soon as possible, before merging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Investigate thoroughly build failures and try to have them fixed as soon as possible, before merging.
```

## A wild failing build appears

Nowadays, it has become quite a common practice to build and check software on machines other than local workstations, most of the time called CI servers(CI stands for [Continuous Integration](https://martinfowler.com/articles/continuousIntegration.html)). This can be done either manually or automatically, usually triggered by a pull/merge request or a direct push on the main trunk (in git terminology most of the times named *master*).

The point is that there's a single place where binaries are packaged and code is checked for quality and correctness, so we can merge changes safely and with confidence. 

> When a failure appears in a build it should be investigated why did it happen. Did a commit actually break functionality? Were static code analysis checks too harsh and maybe they must be relaxed a little bit? Recently, one of the failures that left me most perplexed was a build where the unit tests failed on the CI server unit tests but passed locally! How did this happen? Investigating on this confusing build failure unearthed bigger problems than just a breaking unit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a failure appears in a build, it should be investigated why it happened. Did a commit actually break functionality? Were static code analysis checks too harsh and maybe they must be relaxed a little bit? Recently, one of the failures that left me most perplexed was a build where the unit tests failed on the CI server unit tests but passed locally! How did this happen? Investigating on this confusing build failure unearthed bigger problems than just a breaking unit
```

## Maybe Mockito can mock final classes after all

If Mockito cannot mock final classes, then why do local tests pass? Well, sure there must be some way to mock a final class, and that's exactly what happens when the `org.mockito:mockito-inline` dependency is added to the gradle build file. 

The problem is that the failing module did not compile with the dependency above. Instead, a submodule did declare mockito-inline on its `build.gradle` but not as a transitive dependency, meaning that final classes could be mocked on that submodule only, not on the top module whose tests were failing. 

This could easily be fixed by either declaring mockito-inline as transitive, or adding it on the top module, but that would not explain why the test resources are compiled differently on the CI server than locally.

Based on gradle files, on the CI server the build failed as expected, but locally mockito-inline was compiled on the top module (where it shouldn't) and it wrongfully passed. This, however, begs the following question: how can the CI server be compiled and tested in a different way than the local build?

> It turns out that different commands are employed to compile and test the source code. On the CI server the project is compiled and tested with gradle commands, thus the mockito-inline is not compiled and the test that mocks Kotlin classes fails. On the other hand the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It turns out that different commands are employed to compile and test the source code. On the CI server the project is compiled and tested with gradle commands, thus the mockito-inline is not compiled and the test that mocks Kotlin classes fails. On the other hand, the
```

local builds used the test runner that is natively built into Android Studio, which happens to compile all libraries irrespectively of how they are declared on each module's `gradle.build`.

## But why did mockito-inline was used on the first place?

At last, the mystery has been solved but let's dig a little deeper. Why did a test try to mock an otherwise concrete class? And when/why was the mockito-inline dependency introduced first?

> The Kotlin class was mocked just as a filler object for the constructor. No verifications were performed on that mocked object - neither was it used to stub a value. Hence, the concrete class should be used as is or in case of an interface, which cannot be instantiated, a dummy test double. If a concrete class was mocked because it was difficult to instantiate(for example because it has too many dependencies on its constructor) that is a moment where it is needed to pause and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kotlin class was mocked just as a filler object for the constructor. No verifications were performed on that mocked object - neither was it used to stub a value. Hence, the concrete class should be used as is or in case of an interface, which cannot be instantiated, a dummy test double. If, however, a concrete class was mocked because it was difficult to instantiate (e.g. it has too many dependencies on its constructor), then this is a moment where one needs to pause and
```

> think. As for value(`data`) classes? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
think twice. As for value(`data`) classes? 
```

Quoted directly from the book *Growing object-oriented Guided by Tests* [ [^1] ]:

> ***Don’t Mock Values***

> On the other hand, mockito-inline was introduced in the submodule in order to verify the behavior of a third-party library. Let's say that it was needed to test the persistence layer of an app. We could either run an integrated test in order to check if the code we've written works well against the real database, or we could mock the database as below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, mockito-inline was introduced in the submodule in order to verify the behavior of a third-party library. Let's say that we had to test the persistence layer of an app. We could either run an integrated test in order to check if the code we've written works well against the real database, or we could mock the database as below.
```

Reviewer: Also, can you make the transition from the first sentence to the second smoother? It should better reflect the reasons you are giving this example.

    }
```

First of all, the problem with this test is that it actually tests nothing. The class under test is mocked and its result is stubbed, so it seems all that is tested here is the ability of the mock framework to stub a value. These kinds of tests give us no feedback and no confidence, in other words they provide zero value. We should instead automate the test for the real thing or test it manually.

What's more, we are not listening to the tests. Instead of trying to guess how the library should respond to a request and find ways to mock/stub whatever is required to feed that answer to an assertion, we should add an Adapter layer over the third-party code, test the Adapter with the library and mock callbacks that we may pass to the Adapter layer. 

Perhaps some direct quotes can paint the picture in a better way [ [^2] ]:

> The mess in such tests is telling us that the design isn’t right but, instead of fixing the problem by improving the code, we have to carry the extra complexity in both code and test.

> A second risk is that we have to be sure that the behavior we stub or mock matches what the external library will actually do.

> ## Summing up

Reviewer: Perhaps enhance the title to "Summing up - Guidelines" ? This section is something more than just a rehash of what you have already described.

Author: Split up in two sections, first one _Mitigate the many faces of the problem_ and then _Summing up_

> So far we've seen that there is a build failure that was only caught on the CI server - caused by the abuse of mocks on unit tests and the difference in the way CI and local builds are created - which managed to pass to the main trunk and obstruct other pull requests even though no bugs were introduced. Is there a single root cause in this situation? Multiple layers of safety had too be overriden in order for the failure to reach the mainline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far we've seen that there is a build failure that was only caught on the CI server - caused by the abuse of mocks on unit tests and the difference in the way CI and local builds are created - which managed to pass to the main trunk and obstruct other pull requests even though no bugs were introduced. Is there a single root cause in this situation? Multiple layers of safety had to be overidden in order for the failure to reach the mainline.
```

> This is not so much an issue of technical deficiency - all developers on the team are quite competent. In order to understand the problems and their various causes let's state the facts and try to analyze the situation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is not so much an issue of technical deficiency - all developers on the team are quite competent. In order to understand the problems and their various causes, let's state the facts and try to analyze the situation.
```

***Mocks are used excessively and on the wrong context***. They are a special case of test doubles that are used for verification testing [ [^3] ]. 

Using mocks as the de facto test double highlights a lack of understanding of the tools used for testing. Quoting again Nat Pryce and Steve Freeman [ [^1] ]:

> our intention in test-driven development is to use mock objects to bring out relationships between objects.

> In every test it should be carefully evaluated what kind of test doubles(if any) are needed and try to minimize mocks only for verifying behavior on interfaces. Of course, there are times where every rule needs to be broken, but most of times we can avoid using tools such as mockito-inline and PowerMock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In every test, it should be carefully evaluated what kind of test doubles(if any) are needed and try to minimize mocks only for verifying behavior on interfaces. Of course, there are times where every rule needs to be broken, but most of times we can avoid using tools such as mockito-inline and PowerMock.
```

***The build failed too late and only on the CI server***. The local workstations and the CI server should build with the same commands in order to avoid unpleasant surprises like this one. Unfortunately, it may be a common assumption that Android Studio builds and tests the same way with the setup of a CI server(this surely caught me by surprise as well). 

> Maybe we could check once in a while the way Android Studio builds, no more less because an update can change how things are built and tested. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maybe we could check once in a while the way Android Studio builds, no more no less, because an update can change how things are built and tested. 
```

***Broken code passed on the main trunk***. Even though the build failed, eventually the code was merged and made available for others. 

The safety nets here could be more thorough code reviews that check the quality of the tests as well.

> Sometimes being in a hurry does not help and if the CI server is erratic and fails often from timeouts we may think that its a fault negative. In any case, we should always investigate why builds fail and try to fix them again as soon as possible. Just having tests is not enough - they should provide fast feedback and confidence. They should be easy to read and understand, easy to create and their failures easy to decode, as well as deterministic. These qualities of tests are the weapons that a developer can exploit in order to refactor aggressively and keep the system easy to understand and change. Add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes being in a hurry does not help and if the CI server is erratic and fails often from timeouts, we may think that its a fault negative. In any case, we should always investigate why builds fail and try to fix them again as soon as possible. Just having tests is not enough - they should provide fast feedback and confidence. They should be easy to read and understand, easy to create and their failures easy to decode, as well as deterministic. These qualities of tests are the weapons that a developer can exploit in order to refactor aggressively and keep the system easy to understand and change. Add
```

---
title: "A confusing build failure"
date: 2019-11-07T01:00:09+02:00
draft: true
tags: ["testing", "continuous integration"]
---

{{< figure src="/images/posts/broken_builds/judge-dredd-under-arrest.jpg" title="" >}}

> Nowadays it has become quite a common practice to build and check software on machines other than local workstations, most of the time called CI servers(CI stands for [Continuous Integration](https://martinfowler.com/articles/continuousIntegration.html)). This can be done manually or automatically, usually triggered by a pull/merge request or a direct push on the main trunk(in git terminology most of the times named *master*).

Reviewer: Test comment. Add comma after Nowadays.

Reviewer: Comment 2: This can be done **_either_** manually or automatically.

> Nowadays it has become quite a common practice to build and check software on machines other than local workstations, most of the time called CI servers(CI stands for [Continuous Integration](https://martinfowler.com/articles/continuousIntegration.html)). This can be done manually or automatically, usually triggered by a pull/merge request or a direct push on the main trunk(in git terminology most of the times named *master*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nowadays, it has become quite a common practice to build and check software on machines other than local workstations, most of the time called CI servers(CI stands for [Continuous Integration](https://martinfowler.com/articles/continuousIntegration.html)). This can be done either manually or automatically, usually triggered by a pull/merge request or a direct push on the main trunk(in git terminology most of the times named *master*).
```

> The point is that there's a single point where binaries are packaged and code is checked for quality and correctness, so we can merge changes safely and with confidence. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The point is that there's a single place where binaries are packaged and code is checked for quality and correctness, so we can merge changes safely and with confidence. 
```

> When a failure appears in a build it should be investigated why did it happen. Did a commit actually break functionality/introduce a bug? Was static code analysis checks too harsh and maybe they must be relaxed a little bit? One of the failures that left me most perplexed was a build that was failing on the CI server unit tests but passed locally! How did this happen? Investigating on this confusing build failure unearthed bigger problems than just a breaking unit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a failure appears in a build, its root causes need to be determined. Did a commit actually break functionality/introduce a bug? Was static code analysis checks too harsh and maybe they must be relaxed a little bit? Recently, one of the failures that left me most perplexed was a build where the unit tests failed on the CI server but passed locally! How did this happen? Investigating on this confusing build failure unearthed bigger problems than just a breaking unit
```

test.

## Mockito cannot mock final classes

> So why was the build failing? When the unit tests ran some of them would fail with an error stating that Mockito(more specifically [mockito-kotlin](https://github.com/nhaarman/mockito-kotlin)) - a library commonly used in Java and Android to provide mock test doubles and for behavior verification - cannot mock final classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So why was the build failing? When the unit tests ran, some of them would fail with an error stating that Mockito (more specifically [mockito-kotlin](https://github.com/nhaarman/mockito-kotlin)) - a library commonly used in Java and Android to provide mock test doubles and behavior verification - cannot mock final classes.
```

> In order to understand the error let's try to understand first how Mockito works. It creates at runtime objects that extend interfaces or a classes which can be used to verify that some methods were called with specific parameters. If a class that is attempted to be mocked is declared as `final` then the error above will be thrown, as a final class cannot be extended at compile or run time. In a unit test a Kotlin class was mocked and as Kotlin classes are by default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to understand the error, let's try to understand first how Mockito works. It creates, at runtime, objects that extend interfaces or a classes designed to verify that a set of methods were called with the intended parameters. If a class that is attempted to be mocked is declared as `final`, then the error above will be thrown as a final class cannot be extended at compile or run time. In our unit test, a Kotlin class was mocked and as Kotlin classes are by default
```

> `final` unless explicitly declared `open`, the error above was thrown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`final`, unless explicitly declared `open`, the error above was thrown.
```

> The culprit was found but we still have not figured out why the tests pass locally but fail on the CI. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the culprit is found, we still have not yet figured out why the tests passed locally but failed on the CI. 
```

## Maybe Mockito can mock final classes after all

> If Mockito cannot mock final classes then why do local tests pass? Well sure there must be some way to mock a final class, and that's exactly what happened by adding in the gradle build file the `org.mockito:mockito-inline` dependency. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Mockito cannot mock final classes, then why do local tests pass? Well, sure there must be some way to mock a final class, and that's exactly what happened in our case when the `org.mockito:mockito-inline` dependency was added in the gradle build file. 
```

> The problem is that the failing module did not compile with the dependency above. Another submodule did compile it, but it was declared on its `build.gradle` as `testImplementation` not `testApi`, meaning that final classes could be mocked on that submodule only, not on the failing module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TThe problem with our case was that the failing module on the CI server did not compile with the above dependency while a submodule on the local workstation did. This unexpected behavior was traced back to the build.gradle script of the local workstation where the mockito-inline dependency was set to testImplementation not testApi, meaning that final classes could be mocked only on that submodule and not on the failing module. As a result, the CI server build rightly failed, but, locally, the mockito-inline dependency was included (when it shouldn’t) and it wrongly passed the tests. 
```

> The problem is that the failing module did not compile with the dependency above. Another submodule did compile it, but it was declared on its `build.gradle` as `testImplementation` not `testApi`, meaning that final classes could be mocked on that submodule only, not on the failing module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem with our case was that the failing module on the CI server did not compile with the above dependency while a submodule on the local workstation did. This unexpected behavior was traced back to the `build.gradle` script of the local workstation where the mockito-inline dependency was set to `testImplementation` and not `testApi`, meaning that final classes could be mocked only on that submodule and not on the failing module.
```

Author: @ktsiligkos Actually the behavior is well expected.  A dependency  is declared in gradle as `api` seldom because that way it's transitive something that generally is avoided. 

What I try to highlight here is that mockito-inline was expected to not compile in the top module, but it did compile nevertheless.

> On the CI server the build rightly failed, but locally mockito-inline was compiled on the module above(where it shouldn't) and it wrongfully passed. How can the CI server be compiled and tested in a different way than locally? It turns out by running different commands that compile and test the source code. On the CI server the project is compiled and tested with gradle commands, thus the mockito-inline is not compiled and the test that mocks Kotlin classes fails. On the other hand the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, the CI server build rightly failed, but, locally, the mockito-inline dependency was included (when it shouldn't) and it wrongly passed the tests. This, however, begs the following question:  how can the remote CI server be compiled and tested in a different way than the local build? It turns that different commands are employed to compile and test the source code. On the CI server, the project is compiled and tested with gradle commands, thus mockito-inline is not compiled and the test that mocks Kotlin classes fails. On the other hand, the
```

> local builds used the test runner that is built in the Android Studio, which happens to compile all libraries irrespectively of how they are declared on each module's `gradle.build`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
local builds used the test runner that is natively built into the Android Studio, which happens to compile all libraries irrespectively of how they are declared on each module's `gradle.build`.
```

## But why did mockito-inline was used on the first place?

> The mystery has at last been solved but let's dig a little bit more. Why did a test try to mock an otherwise concrete class? And when/why was the mockito-inline introduced first?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mystery has at last been solved but let's dig a little bit more. Why did a test try to mock an otherwise concrete class? And when/why was the mockito-inline dependency introduced first?
```

> The Kotlin class was mocked just as a filler object for the constructor(i.e. a dummy object). No verifications were performed on that mocked object - neither was it used to stub a value. The concrete class should be used or in case it was an interface and it could not be instantiated, a dummy test double.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kotlin class was mocked just as a filler object for the constructor (i.e. a dummy object). No verifications were performed on that mocked object - neither was it used to stub a value. Hence, the concrete class should be used as is or, in case of an interface that cannot be instantiated, a dummy test double.
```

> On the other hand, mockito-inline was introduced in the submodule in order to verify the behavior of a third-party library. Since we don't own the API and implementation of any third-party library, if we mocked and verified interactions with the library future versions of the API and the implementation could change in subtle ways and even though the tests pass the production code

Reviewer: Needs to become clear what you want to say.

Author: Almost rewrote this from the scratch, I will push changes on another commit as draft 2.

could fail.

> These kind of tests give us no feedback and no confidence, in other words they provide zero value. We should either test the real thing or test it manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These kinds of tests give us no feedback and no confidence, in other words they provide zero value. We should either test the real thing or test it manually.
```

## Summing up

It's quite surprising how a single build failure unearthed multiple cultural and technical shortcomings. 

 * We often push code that we broke - not only tests aren't green but also many times are not compiling. This means that tests are not treated as first class citizens.

> * Mocks are used ***too much***. Mocks are a special case of [test doubles](https://martinfowler.com/articles/mocksArentStubs.html) that are used for verification testing. They are a perfect tool for teasing out collaborators and interfaces, especially when the real objects are hard/costly to use, but should be used with moderation. This means a lack of understanding of the tools used for testing as well when they should be applied. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Mocks are used ***too much***. Mocks are a special case of [test doubles](https://martinfowler.com/articles/mocksArentStubs.html) that are used for verification testing. They are a perfect tool for teasing out collaborators and interfaces, especially when the real objects are hard/costly to use, but should be used with moderation. This highlights a lack of understanding of the tools used for testing as well as when they should be applied. 
```

> * No review on the test code is performed. This again means that tests are treated as second class citizens and a nice to have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* No review on the test code is performed. This, again, means that tests are treated as second class citizens and as a nice to have.
```

* Local builds differ than CI builds. This means we're more prone to false positives/negatives.

> * Broken builds pass on the main trunk. This means that we're in a hurry more times than we would like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Broken builds pass on the main trunk. This indicates that we're in a hurry more times than we would like.
```

> Broken builds should alert the whole team that something has gone bad and needs immediate attention and fix. Just having tests is not enough - they should provide fast feedback and confidence. They should be easy to read and understand, easy to create and their failures easy to decode, as well as deterministic. These qualities of tests are the weapons that a developer can use in order to refactor aggressively and keep the system easy to understand and change. Add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Broken builds should alert the whole team that something has gone bad and needs immediate attention and fix. Just having tests is not enough - they should provide fast feedback and confidence. They should be easy to read and understand, easy to create and their failures easy to decode, as well as deterministic. These qualities of tests are the weapons that a developer can exploiτ in order to refactor aggressively and keep the system easy to understand and change. Add
```

critical thinking to the mix in order to listen to what tests are trying to tell us about our design and we have the ingredients to battle complexity. 

This may sound a little provocative, but we could as well delete tests that do not adhere to the qualities above as we end up with double the burden of maintenance and confusion.

> As a personal critique on my part I could probably say that even though I tried, I should emphasize even more the dangers of mocking too much. After all one cannot learn just by one example, especially from code that is not created with testing in mind - meaning there will be cut corners and "broken" rules on these examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a personal critique on my part I could probably say that even though I tried (something is missing), I should emphasize even more the dangers of mocking too much. After all one cannot learn just by a single example, especially from code that is not created with testing in mind - meaning there will be cut corners and "broken" rules on these examples.
```

Author: @ktsiligkos maybe remove this paragraph? Or reframe by removing the "personal critique" part? This has to do with the fact that I was assigned to give some guidelines to the team on testing, and I know feel that I introduced mocks early or didn't stress enough how things can go wrong from over mocking.

Reviewer: @tsalik you could keep the paragraph. No need to remove the personal critique part either. Just try to incorporate in some manner your intent. 

E.g. you may simply rewrite the first sentence as follows: 
1) "As a personal critique on my part, I could probably say that even though I have tried to introduce mocks in a comprehensive manner, its difficult to emphasize enough the dangers of mocking too much." 
or 
2) "As a personal critique on my part, I could probably say that when I was tasked to provide guidelines to the team about verification testing, I felt that I should have emphasized even more on the dangers of mocking too much."

> Finally, this can be seen as a further proof that tools by themselves do not solve problems. Having tests and a CI server is not enough, it is needed to have a deep understanding why these set of techniques and tools are used, as well as the right place and way to use them. Fortunately these are not arcane magic but knowledge and insight that can be learned through repetitive practice and retrospective. We are bound to fail through inexperience but bound to succeed through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, this can be seen as a further proof that tools by themselves do not solve problems. Having tests and a CI server is not enough. It is critical to have a deep understanding why these set of techniques and tools are used, as well as the right place and way to use them. Fortunately, this level of understanding is not the result of arcane magic but can be acquired through repetitive practice and retrospection. We are bound to fail through inexperience but bound to succeed through
```
